I've been working in the free culture 'zone' for about 20 years.
Probably earnestly working in that space for the last 10. I consider
myself to be pretty aware of free / open culture. Supportive of most of
it, cynical of some aspects. But on the whole I think I do pretty well
at being at home in free culture.

Having said that I am surprised what a journey it has and continues to
be. I find myself still, after all this time, discovering (almost always
its a surprise) that I am holding on to some form of the proprietary way
of thinking. Sometimes I have found myself consciously going quite a
long way down that path before I stop myself and almost force-ably ask
myself "hey! What are you doing?!"

Some time ago I started a methodology called the Book Sprint. Its a way
to facilitate the production of books in 3-5 days with a group of 6-12
people (or so). It took a long time to hammer out this method. Much
financial, personal, and emotional pain to keep going down a road that
nobody, including myself, really understood terribly well. Was it really
possible to make it work? Well, it took about 4 years of hammering on
this methodology, making plenty of mistakes, before I could actually
think about it as a methodology. Before I could actually wield it with
some form of embryonic artistry, see it in action, build upon it,
improve it, teach it to others.

4 years is a long time. It felt like a long time. Truth is, I don't
really know why I didn't give up and my stubbornness is something that
kind of shocks me looking back.

Anyways. I came up with this process and I could see its value. People
were also starting to pay for me to do it. I could see a possible
sustainable lifestyle emerging. So, I started thinking about this more
and wondering how I could make it work. On my mind was not just how to
scale this thing but also how to protect it. I had this horrible feeling
that I was not good enough at scaling the project and some big ugly org
with heaps of cash would scoop in and 'steal it'. I guess I meant they
would swoop in and copy it. I sort of thought they were the same thing.
So, with 15 years or so of free culture under my belt and and versed in
openness what did I do? I looked to Trademark protection. I actually
went down the path and hired a lawyer to look at trade mark protection
for Book Sprints. It was my first step towards owning the methodology.

I look back at that now and I'm kind of amazed I went down that path as
far as I did. I didn't actually follow through with trade marking. The
lawyer told me it was going to cost more and more, and it gave me time
to wake myself up. What was I doing?

Well...it also gave me an opportunity to reflect, not only on my journey
towards protecting the 'IP' of Book Sprints, but also on how inoculated
I was against seeing what I was doing. The fear of losing what I had
created really lead me down a blinkered IP path that was not aligned
with my personal politics. I had compartmentalised things pretty well.
It was pretty amazing.

Since then I have become more aware of this process. The process of
pealing off the layers of proprietary living that is deeply embedded in
us. The process is a process of personal growth. It is actually, or has
been for me, a painful path. Finding inconsistencies in personal belief
systems and weighing up fear vs politics is a hard thing to do. It
really brings some pain with it.

When I talk to people about this, the ones I know have really 'been
through the trenches' of free culture, and lived it, the ones that don't
see 'open' as a license or a prefix for a sector (these are only tools)
- are the ones that nod quickly in agreement. Those that are still
starting usually look at me quite confused as if I have failed in some
way. I'm not a true believer. Its ok. They haven't discovered their own
inconsistencies yet. It takes time.

But...there are plenty of us out there. There is no pure high church or
high preist/priestess that has not found themselves failing the high bar
of free culture they set themselves. At least not in my opinion. I have
called even the purest out on some these issues but calling people out
never gets you anywhere. Its a personal journey and having ones value
system critiqued as impure by another is a road that can feel very
shameful. Shame ain't an good energy and calling people out publicly is
not constructive.

So I continue to go down this path and try and be better and better at
seeing how the proprietary life is alive within me. I try to see it and
bring it out into the open as quickly as I can. To examine it, be
surprised by it, and discard it. I'm getting better at it but still a
long ways to go...

My advice to those struggling with some propietary pattern? Be easy on
yourself. Be easy on others. It happens to all of us.
