I'm helping organize a book titled "The Cost of Freedom" in honor of
Bassel Khartabil, a contributor to numerous free/open knowledge projects
worldwide and in Syria, where he's been a political prisoner since 2012,
missing and in grave danger since October 3. You can read about Bassel
at https://www.eff.org/offline/bassel-khartabil

https://blog.wikimedia.org/2015/10/08/bassel-missing-syria/
https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/MDE24/2603/2015/en/ and lots more
at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bassel_Khartabil and http://freebassel.org/

Much of the book is going to be created at a face-to-face Book Sprint in
Marseille Nov 2-6; some info about that and the theme/title generally at
http://costoffreedom.cc/

We're also asking people like yourself who have been fighting in the
trenches of various free knowledge movements (culture, software,
science, etc.) to contribute brief essays for inclusion in the book. One
form an essay might take is a paragraph on each of:

* An issue you've faced that was challenging to you in your free
knowledge work, through the lens on "cost"; perhaps a career or time
opportunity cost, or the cost of dealing with unwelcoming or worse
participants, or the cost of "peeling off layer upon layer the
proprietary way of life" as put in
http://www.adamhyde.net/open-is-not-a-license/
* How you addressed this challenge, or perhaps have yet to do so completely
* Advice to someone starting out in free knowledge; perhaps along the
lines of had you understood the costs, what would you have done differently

But feel free to be maximally creative within the theme. We don't have a
minimum or a maximum required length for contributed essays, but
especially do not be shy about concision or form. If all we get is haiku
that might be a problem, or there might be a message in that of some sort.

Other details: The book will be PUBLISHED on Nov 6. We need your
contribution no later than the end of Nov 3 UTC to be included. The book
will be released under CC0; giving up the "right" to sue anyone for any
use whatsoever of your contribution is a cost of entry...or one of those
proprietary layers to be peeled back. Send contributions to
book@costoffreedom.cc

Feel free to share this with other people who you know have something to
say on this topic. We're especially looking for voices underrepresented
in free knowledge movements.

Cheers,
Adam

p.s. Please spread the word about #freebassel even if you can't
contribute to the book! 
