---
title: Free Culture in an Expensive World
author: Shauna Gordon-McKeon
section: 'OPENING: FREEDOM'
layout: book
previous: <a href="freedom-to-vs-freedom-from">"Freedom To" vs. "Freedom From"</a>
up: '<a href="./">OPENING: FREEDOM</a>'
next: <a href="what-is-open">What is Open?</a>
---

> “Free as in speech, not free as in beer.”[^1]

How many times have you heard this explanation of free software? It’s
cute, catchy, and a little too glib. After all, nothing’s ever that
simple. But this phrase is more than an oversimplification - it’s a
misleading metaphor, and it represents a fundamental oversight of the
free culture movement.

“Speech” and “beer” - the choice of metaphors is telling. When we
compare free software to free speech, we cast it as a natural right
based on liberty, rather than a legal right based on property.  This
is quite agreeable to US Americans1 , especially the
techno-libertarian set. We adore free speech, the most popular part of
our first and favorite amendment. Free beer, on the other hand, is a
harder metaphor to swallow. But the focus on speech, on liberty-based
rights, does not dispel the implications for property rights, only
obscures them. Let’s take a closer look.

While the first and second freedoms in the Free Software Definition
are arguably matters of liberty, the third and fourth require the
creator to let users distribute copies, and modified copies, of their
software. To use a Free Culture license, as defined by Creative
Commons, one must similarly agree to allow adaptations of one’s work
for commercial purposes. These licenses echo the demand of open
scientists for access to the experimental methods and results of other
researchers, and the insistence of music sharers and fanficcers in
copying, modifying, and remixing the media they love.

It’s clear that developers, researchers, musicians and writers create
something of value. The free culture movement exhorts them to give
that value away. We say it’s a matter of liberty, but mainstream
culture takes a different perspective, focusing instead on
“intellectual property.” Free culture advocates often reject the idea
of intellectual property, arguing that digital products, unlike food
or cabinets or cars, may be trivially copied. One can produce a
thousand copies of Emacs, or of Harry Potter, in a literal
second. Without scarcity, there’s no need for property.

But scarcity is not a natural phenomenon, determined entirely by what
is technologically possible. Like so many things, it is socially
constructed.  Humanity produces enough food to feed the world, enough
vaccine to wipe out a dozen diseases, and, in the United States at
least, enough housing to shelter our six hundred thousand homeless
brothers and sisters. Why should we direct our energies against
artificial scarcity in culture, when artificial scarcity elsewhere
causes more fundamental harm?

It’s not surprising then that so many members of the free culture
movement are, like myself, immensely privileged. As the child of an
upper middle-class family, a United States citizen, a white, cis
college graduate, I have no fear that I will ever be hungry, homeless,
or without vital health care.  Without persistent reminders of these
artificial scarcities, it is easy for me to focus on free culture; I
can ignore property because I have access to plenty of it.

Like many other free software activists, I have used the phrase “free
as in speech, not free as in beer” for years. But I have come to
understand that it is not an explanation but an equivocation. Free
culture absolutely has implications for property, and we need to face
them.

The schism between Free Software and Open Source Software can be
interpreted through the response to this problem. Free Software
advocates tend to embrace liberty rights, preferring not to think
about property, and often eschewing the idea of intellectual property
altogether (while retaining, for the most part, their belief in other
kinds of property). Open Source advocates, on the other hand, try to
reconcile the property implications of free software with the
capitalist culture in which most of it is produced. Open source, they
argue, will increases the value of your property. As Mako Hill notes
in his essay “[When Free Software Isn't Better][0]”, the Open Source
Initiative’s mission statement focuses on the higher quality and lower
cost of open source software. But, he continues, free/open source
software is sometimes of lower quality and lower value to individuals
and businesses.  The reconciliation of free software and capitalist
culture, always fragile, falls apart.

But the open source approach is not the only way to come at “free as
in beer”. The private capital of businesses using open source isn’t
the only kind of property. There is - and always has been - the
commons.

It is easy to reframe the arguments for free culture around the
commons. The case for open science becomes the case for public
knowledge. The case for free distribution of art and literature
becomes the case for shared culture. And the case for free software
becomes the case for collectively built, collectively-evaluated
technology. Free culture, then, is a movement which advocates
universal access to a common good.

This is not a new perspective, of course. One of the most well-known
free culture organizations, Creative Commons, uses precisely this
framing. But many others reject it, and even those who embrace a
digital commons often ignore the pressing threats to our natural and
social commons. They advocate for free culture but not for public
education, universal health care, guaranteed housing, and basic
income, or their equivalents

This is not just a matter of morality. The lack of a fiercely
protected natural and social commons endangers the digital one. In a
scarcity society, our labor must be hoarded jealously. People don’t
have time to learn about their computers, submit patches to projects,
seek out free music instead of stolen music. They don’t have the
security to publish in open access journals, to protest surveillance,
to give away their art or their software in hope of future
reward. Many who would love to participate in free culture cannot, as
Ashe Dryden lays out eloquently in her piece “[The Ethics of Unpaid
Labor and the OSS Community][1].”  Like unpaid political and literary
internships, free software contributions act as a filter, allowing
only the privileged to participate.

It’s tempting to wave away this last issue by arguing that less
privileged people have greater access to free culture than to
proprietary cultural products. After all, we’re giving it away! But
accessibility is seldom a priority in free culture - in free software,
many projects are made for other developers and we celebrate
“scratching your own itch”. Not that a focus on less privileged people
is always better - in fact, it can be deeply condescending and
unhelpful. No, these arguments miss the point entirely. The groups
under-represented in free culture are not hamstrung primarily by lack
of access to the digital commons, but by threats to the natural and
social commons.

Acting in solidarity with the struggle for physical security and
against abuse is not only the right thing to do, it benefits all of
us. When the free culture movement represents the fullness of human
diversity, scratching your own itch will leave everyone satisfied.
When it contains everyone who shares its values, we’ll have the
resources and the reach we need to ensure a vibrant and
widely-treasured digital commons.

We live in alarming times. Even the computers with which we create
these digital gifts are made, too often, by people trapped in abusive
conditions, using processes that blight our primal Commons, the global
environment. We cannot abstract away these facts; we cannot advocate
for free culture as though in a vacuum. We must advocate for the
commons in all of its forms - digital, social, economic, environmental
- before the cost of freedom becomes too high to bear.

<p class="author bio">Shauna Gordon-McKeon is a U.S. writer,
independent researcher and developer. She focuses on open technologies
and communities.</p>

[0]: https://mako.cc/writing/hill-when_free_software_isnt_better.html
[1]: http://www.ashedryden.com/blog/the-ethics-of-unpaid-labor-and-the-oss-community
[^1]: I am from the United States. This essay is written from that
      limited perspective, and may not apply to other countries and
      cultures.
