---
title: Resilient Networks
author: 
section: AFFORDANCES
layout: book
previous: <a href="transdisciplinarity">Transdisciplinarity</a>
up: <a href="./">AFFORDANCES</a>
next: <a href="reconciliation">Reconciliation</a>
---

## Makers

In France, most of the Makers are hobbyists, technolovers, geeks that
create for fun, for local glory and some, for business. But few of
them are makers for social or political goals. Most of the objects
created in fablabs and makerspaces in the last years are useless
regarding the urgent problems of the planet. Because the planet is on
fire. Climate crisis. Energy crisis. Demography crisis. Water
crisis. Metals crisis. Financial crisis. Education crisis, even crisis
of mental health because of the abuse of digital communication.

But stop ! it's enough ! Come back to transformaking, No-one wants to
hear about this crude reality !

## Resilient Society

And that's the problem: historians studying the extinction of old
civilisations in the last millennia have discovered that leaders and
populations knew about the perfectly serious problems of their time,
but they ignored the scientific advice and all indicators turning to
red, until the end. We are doing exactly the same and we don't have a
lot of time to act. We must transform all sectors of the society
before the conjunction of some important crisis, and transformakers
will help us to do it.

In the global village, industry is totally dependent on flux, networks
of raw materials, energy, goods, tools, components, distribution and
transportation. Any failure in one spot can disturb or stop the whole
chain, from extraction of raw materials to distribution of goods. This
interdependency is an enormous fragility in the context of the coming
crisis, and transformakers can help us to break it.

We have all noticed that we can't really count on our political
systems to find efficient solutions. We know we can only count on
ourselves. We, citizens, can build resilient communities, based on
small structures, driven by direct democracy, and based on big
citizenship networking.  We have the digital tools and the network to
do it.

Transformakers have a key role in this transition from globalisation
to resilience.

## Global Crisis

The COP21 UN conference about climate change offers to limit the rise
of the global temperature to two degrees more. Accepting 2 degrees
more, on average, for the planet, however, is accepting violent
transformations of the climate that will create a giant loss of
biodiversity, massive extinction of species in earth and ocean during
those years. Two degrees more will also create huge environmental and
social disorders, instability everywhere, wars, starvation.  Hundreds
of millions of refugees will have to move, dismantling completely the
actual geopolitic equilibrium.

Pure water is also missing everywhere because of very bad management,
but the most important resource crisis will come with metals and
oil. We live now with the illusion of infinite resources, but this new
prosperity will have an end. The planet has a limited quantity of
fossil energy in the ground, and we are reaching the limits in one or
two generations, in our children's lifetimes. No lessons have been
taken from the 2008 crash. Improvements in high-frequency trading do
not actually cover the many debts of countries and their people. Big
monetary regulators are also provoking also a crisis of democracy, of
citizenship, of trust in each other.

A new era of chaos brings an opportunity for radically changing the
system in good directions.

## Transformaking

How can transformakers help in the context of global crisis ?

By helping us to change the scale from globalization to small
resilient networked communities, to rebuild real direct democracy and
redefine urbanisation and the usage of our lands. By helping us to
rebuild our social organisation around knowledge networks.  By helping
us to harvest clean energy, renewable energy everywhere, and to share
it. By helping us to redefine our material strategies, our industrial
strategies. By creating new models for currencies and money
circulation.

We discover today that good social, environmental and financial
practices have always existed. Transformaking is the common behaviour
in many communities in the world, especially in rural areas: do it
yourself, DIWithOthers, Do It Together: people invent tools and
technologies adapted to their context, to their pragmatic needs, using
few resources, using local resources. People repair, they recycle,
they hack objects, they transmit the knowledge to young
generations. Poor countries will not suffer as much as rich countries
in the chaotic future, because they have always lived in the
Transformaking way.

In social organisation, all over the world, small communities use
solidarity structures, monetary arrangements, like barter systems that
can be considered as local money, in a pure peer-to-peer exchange. The
organisation of traditional communities offers big lessons for us and
this model just needs digital tools to be adapted to small communities
in the modern world.

## Sharing knowledge = open sourcing

Transformaking officially arrived in our society 30 years ago, when
hackers started to change the world with the first open source
software licences, one of the most powerful political acts of the XXth
century. Artists followed the movement 20 years ago with open source
documents and artwork licences, and some makers have taken another
important step, ten years ago, with Open Source Hardware
licences. This is transformaking: changing the society by offering
alternatives containing the values of solidarity and knowledge.

Open source technologies, from their concept of production and
distribution, open the possibility of a total citizen control on
technology. It's now possible to envision human-scale industry,
citizen industry, decentralized industry, like our ancestors did
before the Industrial Revolution. The ecosystem of transformaking is
self-organised around knowledge networks. Any technological process
can be created or improved by transformakers, because networks of
knowledge, networks of citizen research, networks of materials and
networks of components exists underground. In the recent years,
transformakers have started to design and build very complicated open
source machines related to many sectors of industry, and citizen
research now attacks topics such as high tech medicine, nuclear
physics, nanotechnologies or genetics. All in Open Source: Free Libre
Open Source Software (FLOSS) and Free Libre Open Source Hardware
(FLOSH).

Patents are living their last twenty years, even in some very
protected niche industries, such as medical equipment: look at their
websites and initiatives.

One could argue that hackers, transformakers are not regulated by
authorities, certifications, ethics commitees and could launch
projects which are dangerous projects for society. But no. They
wouldn't. Because transformakers are a network of citizens, we are
self-organized and the debate is always open in open source
technologies. Creation and correction of code, of designs, follows
real democratic rules, much less dangerous than government or
military-security projects.  How to promote more transformaking in
society?

First by protecting the Internet and net neutrality. Networking tools
are essential for democracy and sharing of knowledge. Big companies
like Facebook and GAFAM are silently killing the Internet by replacing
all software on the client side, by services driven by their
data-sucker servers, associated to the Panopticon of the Internet Of
Things. New global totalitarianism.

We can promote transformaking

- by supporting hackers and transformaker projects through
  crowdfunding
- by opening new medialabs, hackerspaces, makerspaces, and open
  laboratories, and specializing in them ( biology, health,
  agriculture, etc)
- by opening places in cities to dismantle, repair, recycle objects,
  parts, etc
- by choosing to use open source software and open source hardware
  when available
- by funding P2P and common goods initiatives in all sectors of
  society
- by installing education programmes about hacking, about
  transformaking
- by choosing slow and resilient communication technologies for
  establishing strong communication and education networks.

## Post capitalist era

Transition from globalisation to new resilient small-scale networked
societies is necessary and must start now.  Transformakers are the
first explorers of the post-capitalist era. But they don't move
alone. Many new citizen organisations, new-style political movements
are following the movement, but most of them ignore what
transformakers are doing.

Transformakers have started to transform the society through new
behaviours based on local resources, local solidarities,
self-management and direct democracy, and based on global
communication and global exchange of knowledge.

Instead of losing energy to promote this vision into standard
political systems, we need to start building initiatives around us,
responding to our values, co-existing with the actual system, and if
our alternatives are good, if our models take sense into the society,
they will naturally replace the old system, without war, without
revolutions.

__Let's do it. DIY, DIT, DIWO, DIN__[^1]

<p class="author bio"><a href="../authors/jean-noel-montagne">Jean Noël Montagné</a>, founder of a hackerspace in Nice, France, called Nicelab, "Open Laboratory of Nice".</p>

[^1]: Do-It-Yourself, Do-It-Together, Do-It-With-Others, Do-It-Now
