---
title: Free as in Commons
author: hellekin
section: "OPENING: FREEDOM"
layout: book
previous: <a href="freedom-as-a-commodity">Freedom as a Commodity</a>
up: '<a href="./">OPENING: FREEDOM</a>'
next: <a href="../architectonics-of-power">ARCHITECTONICS OF POWER</a>
---

The Free Software Movement is 32 years old. In 1983, Dr. Richard
Matthew Stallman, also known as rms, his computer user name, invited
the world to write a sufficient body of free software to restore
users' freedom, and for not having to use proprietary software
ever. In his original announcement of the GNU system, on Thanksgiving,
1983, Stallman stated his reasons for building a complete operating
system that would be entirely free software: sharing with others the
programs you like, and to continue using computers without violating
this, and other ethical principles.

Stallman was then working at the Artificial Intelligence laboratory of
MIT, center of a substantial software-sharing community in the decades
before. Hackers on PDP-10 computers there and in other places would
write software and share it among themselves, as naturally as cooks
share recipes. But in the early 1980s, the PDP-10 line of computers on
which they had been writing software was discontinued. New
architectures had appeared, such as VAX and 68020, that made most of
their software obsolete. The operating systems on these new
architectures, VMS and BSD UNIX, were encumbered with non-disclosure
agreements. A program is like a recipe. A nonfree program is like a
binary recipe that only your kitchen robot could make, but you
couldn't reproduce yourself, nor share it with anyone else. Imagine
going to a friend's house and enjoying a fantastic chocolate cake;
when you'd ask for the recipe, they would tell you: "sorry dear, but I
can't give it to you, only I am allowed to make it." How antisocial
would that sound? That sounds exactly like nonfree software.

The software-sharing community at MIT's AI lab had collapsed the year
before his decision, as most hackers went away to work at a new
spin-off company. Stallman was faced with a stark moral choice: he
could join the emerging proprietary software social system and close
his eyes to the digital divide between developers and users; or he
could leave the software industry altogether, but that would not
prevent it from becoming antisocial; or he could, as his profession
was to write operating systems, develop a new one that would protect
the freedom to use, share, and improve software for all. He chose the
latter, embarking onto the enormous project of creating an ethical
world of software, starting with the GNU operating system, a system
that would respect users' essential freedoms.

In an age on instant gratification, rarely the mind is put to measure
the consequences of passing time. Hackers love to automate away the
burden of repetition. To spread a political message, we need to repeat
it; that's what rms has done for three decades. To establish freedom,
we must teach many people to appreciate freedom. The tremendous
achievements of software freedom to date don't end the need to remind
people year after year that the struggle continues, even more
importantly today.

The analysis has developed, but the original intent remains the
same. In hindsight, free software advocates easily distinguish between
individual and collective freedoms, to insist on the interdependence
required to achieve our goal. But it took years to formalize the four
essential freedoms and the free software definition.

The first two freedoms granted by free software to the user enable to
run the software for any purpose, and to study how the software works
to be able to adapt the source code to one's own needs. These freedoms
enable each user to exert individual control over their computing. A
programmer can learn from the source code. But not everyone is a
developer and able to program software. Therefore, it was necessary to
implement collective control of software, in the same way as for
science and culture: to turn software into a commons. The other two
freedoms enable sharing the code, that is the knowledge and know-how,
with anyone so that you can help your neighbor, and being free to
distribute modified versions of the software so that non-programmers
can benefit from free software as well.

The four freedoms encourage synergies between users and developers for
the benefit of all: a group of user can decide what to do; the
programmers among them can implement it; If something scandalous is
found in a free program, such as the malicious functionality commonly
discovered in proprietary software, programmer-users will fix it and
then distribute the corrected version widely to the other users.

Making changes though, is not always easy. All software is governed by
copyright law, like many other creations such as text, photography, or
video. When you distribute such works, the law grants you exclusive
property over it, whether you like it or not: thus, if you release a
program without taking a step to make it free, it is automatically
nonfree. Copyright denies users the four freedoms by default. The step
required to make a program free is to attach a legal statement, from
the copyright holders, giving users the four freedoms. Such a
statement is called a "free software license".

Free software licenses existed before 1983. Stallman's innovative
legal hack, called "copyleft", was to write a copyright license, that
required all copies redistributed, even modified, to come with the
same freedoms. The GNU General Public License grants the four
essential freedoms to everyone that gets a copy of the code, including
any additions or changes, iteratively _ad infinitem_. It creates a
community in which everyone gets freedom.

The essence of software freedom is control of your own technology: the
technology that you make, and the technology that you use. In a world
dominated by software powerhouses, technology is often understood as
the product created by inaccessible engineers and sold by their
employing corporations. Whereas the users of a proprietary program are
forcibly limited to being consumers, the users of free software are
citizens of their software community and take part in the collective
invention of technology. This prompts an incentive for cooperative
research in computing, for the benefit of all humans, similarly to
science, and culture.

Software, science, and culture have been under attack by promoters of
so-called "Intellectual Property", a bag-word covering many different
legal concepts with varying scopes, conveniently put together under a
seemingly innocent umbrella that hides how different these laws are,
and claims that human intellectual work comes solely from the mind of
the person expressing it. It takes no effort to understand the
deception here. A brief look into Greek mythology and the history of
literature can easily demonstrate that, as Sir Isaac Newton famously
wrote: even a genius sits on the shoulders of giants.

__What are the issues with non-copyleft, or lax licenses, such the
3-clause BSD license?__

Companies such as Apple want to convince you not to use copyleft on
your software, because they would like to convert it into nonfree
software and subjugate users with it. If you give them what they want,
you may "have millions of users" but you will not have advanced their
freedom at all. On the contrary, you would have chosen popularity over
freedom, and lost technological sovereignty in the process.

Mac OS X is based on a BSD architecture. They generate gigantic
amounts of sales and the FreeBSD hackers seldom see any of it, and
can't use what Apple built on top of their code that would benefit all
their users. This is in essence the difference between copyleft and
non-copyleft: the former insists the code remains free as it develops,
including larger programs, while the latter encourages cannibalization
of the source code by defectors.

__How does that contrast with the GPL?__

If Mac OS X was based on the GNU operating system, it would remain
free. Copyleft is a cooperation enforcer, that respects their freedom
to use our software, as part of our community; what it denies them is
the chance to convert our software into an instrument to dominate
others. The GPL is an institution to enable cooperation.

Defectors do not want to cooperate. They want to dominate
others. Although they can use modified GPL software for their own
interest in private, they refuse to become part of the community. The
GPL requires that If they choose to distribute their modified version
of the software, they must accept to become contributors to the
software, like any previous contributors who enabled them to benefit
from the program in the first place. They claim a (moral) right to
abuse the work of others to make users divided and helpless.

It took Stallman a few years to clearly separate the two meanings of
the English word "free". Free software is a matter of freedom, not
price. Copies do not have to be gratis: you're free to offer copies in
exchange for pay. But if the copies don't carry the four essential
freedoms, they are not free software. The Latin root for liberty found
in Roman languages gives a synonym to overcome the ambiguity of the
English "free": libre. This allows us not to enter into a false debate
regarding the alleged incompatibility of free software with commercial
applications. If proprietary software vendors sell license rights to
their users, free software vendors cannot do this; nevertheless they
can still sell copies of the software, development itself, and
services related to the it: distribution, support, education, etc.

There is a misled simplification that consists in arguing that if the
software source code is available, people won't pay to obtain it. But
not everyone is a developer, and most people will prefer paying a
company to take responsibility for their software: they do it all the
time with proprietary software. The main difference with copyleft is
that they don't pay copyleft free software vendors for a restrictive
license: instead the license is there to protect them from abusive
vendors!

In the USA, You can put a program explicitly in public domain. But
that's equivalent to releasing it under a weak, pushover
license. Doing so, however, falls back to the earlier case of a
non-copyleft license: defectors can abuse your work and claim it for
themselves. Making a program proprietary declares that anyone who goes
there is under your power. Releasing it under a lax license declares
that people there are free as long as they don't surrender that
freedom to anyone else; the software is in the commons, precariously,
as long as nobody privatizes it by making it nonfree. The choice of a
copyleft free software license such as the GPL makes a stronger
political claim: it tells the world you're willing to give away your
work for others to build upon, as long as it irrevocably remains part
of the commons, resisting others' attempts to pull it out.

<p class="author bio"><a href="../authors/hellekin">hellekin</a> is a
free software activist, global nomad, member of the <a
href="http://dyne.org">Dyne.org</a> foundation and <a
href="https://gnu.org/consensus">GNU consensus</a> maintainer.</p>
