---
title: Too Poor Not to Care
author: Ben Dablo
section: 'OPENING: FREEDOM'
layout: book
previous: <a href="my-brain-on-freedom">My Brain on Freedom</a>
up: '<a href="./">OPENING: FREEDOM</a>'
next: <a href="inside-or-outside-the-movement">Inside or Outside the Movement</a>
---

I am writing about free culture from the perspective of someone who
uses free software and consumes free culture because it's the only
thing I can afford. Although I pay a heavy opportunity cost, the
alternative is supporting proprietary regimes that are actively making
the world worse.

At the risk of my future social and economic mobility, I have a
confession to make: I don't have much money. I'm one minor disaster
from being completely reliant on the generosity of others again. Poor
is the common way of putting it, but I try to avoid self-labeling as
such since that would invite further disadvantage. Why I don't have
money is a personally well-trodden topic, but for many reasons I won't
discuss, it's a common state for many people. Despite having little
capital in a society that places so much emphasis on capital, I
consider myself fortunate.

I have the privilege of writing these words using free software on a
(mostly) free operating system. My computer isn't even modern enough
to run a currently supported proprietary OS. Much of my education and
character can be traced back to free culture sources. The novel "Down
and Out in the Magic Kingdom", by Cory Doctorow, introduced me to a
world where the alternatives to closed systems could win, where one
could even thrive without the motivation of securing as much private
ownership and IP as possible. It was released under a Creative Commons
non-commercial license that inspired me to write, freed from the
assumption that I must always choose between success and my principled
opposition to proprietary regimes.

That's how I felt over ten years ago as a student, but a decade on, I
wonder if the cost has been worth it. Perhaps I'd be financially
secure if I went with Microsoft products in the developer space
instead of the LAMP stack. Maybe I'd be a successful musician if I had
spent my meager funds on proprietary music production software instead
of struggling with free software packages that were often incomplete
by comparison. Of course, all my unrealized potential could simply be
attributed to my own shortcomings as a developer, musician, and
writer. But what about everyone else, the young people that may
someday be asked to choose between free culture values and success?

I would tell them without regret that I would choose the same
path. Success at the price of one's principles is really an ethical
failure framed the wrong way. In the past such a statement could be
interpreted as melodrama; being forced to pay a small fee to consume
old entertainment media is hardly the most pressing issue, but today
the costs of closed systems and proprietary regimes are plainly
manifest on a global scale. In the human rights space, free software
contributors build tools used by dissidents, activists, and
whistleblowers. Proprietary vendors, when they're not busy adding
backdoors to their software at the behest of governments, largely
ignore those groups. In the environmental space, free knowledge
contributors make educational videos and texts freely available to
millions, while traditional publishers print books on established
topics that are bound from birth for the landfill as next year's
edition will supersede this year's. Duplication of effort on a massive
scale to get around someone else's intellectual property has become
yet another unnecessary source of carbon emissions.

Freedom has many costs. It might even prevent you from ever being
materially wealthy. However, sacrificing our ideals when so much
external to ourselves depends on them is a cost we can no longer
afford.

<p class="author bio">Ben Dablo is a 31 year old citizen wanderer
living in Portland, Oregon.</p>
