---
title: Andromeda Report -- Gliese 832 C Expedition
author: Yu Li
section: Epilogue
layout: book
previous: <a href="the-cost-of-future-tense">The Cost of Future Tense</a>
up: <a href="./">Epilogue</a>
next: <a href="../appendix">Appendix</a>
---

### 1. The return of the Convoy and the forgotten core

Dear Sir and Madam,

Here I am back from the journey where I sacrificed my heart and
half-accomplished my mission as the Gliese 832 C expedition convoy.

I was to accompany them to find their next frontier where they could
find the better system that could perfectly function for their society
and the over-populated planet. But something made this mission
unaccomplishable and I had to return, with dysfunctional parts of the
body components infected, and having lost of part of the precious data
that had needed to be protected.

### 2. The evolved species

> Andromeda species have a core organ, a component used to store a
  high concentration of intelligence and the common knowledge of the
  species. It's a shared source that every individual can acccess to
  instantly exchange knowledge. Decision-making is also generated
  though this part of the organ while connected with external
  information and other useful resources. Since this part of the organ
  is able to absorb human emotion and information, during the period
  on Earth, these two parts are fused together, and can't be
  separated.  And during the transition through Drake Passage
  wormhole, data transferring could not be accomplished, and the core
  was broken, meaning that some part of our Andromeda galaxy
  civilisation's knowledge has been also left behind in that ship.

### 3. Inspection of Planet Earth

To start the story, let me provide a small description of the
situation of Planet Earth.

Planet Earth is a small-sized planet in the solar system located in
the Milky Way Galaxy. This planet is 780 kiloparsecs away from our
Andromeda Galaxy.

After several eras of industrialisation and over-exploitation of the
planetary resource, the species on this planet, "humans," are facing a
crucial moment in which they need to change the social system in order
to survive and continue the expansion of the species.

The planet is facing over-exploitation of resources, and facing a
fundamental shift away from the religious era that has influenced and
disillusioned this species for thousands of years. This religious
system is starting to reach a point where the system of faith and
morality is challenged by the development of science and
technology. This has resulted in wars and insoluble conflict occurring
in different continents, and conflict between religious groups and
these who are well advanced in scientific knowledge and value. The
world is not the same as 2000 years ago when few scientific pioneers
started observing the universe and were surrounded by a solid
religious environment. In opposition, a small number of religious
people are struggling to maintain their territory and their importance
in the social scene, and this causes some regional crises and turmoil.

The society is facing a crossroads and a major decision to be made at
individual, national and planetary level.  It's an era in which the
world is morphing from fog and innocence to an era of enlightenment
through science and knowledge which will make it possible for the
whole human civilisation to expand creatively and efficiently to a
meaningful stage. What is needed is a way to ensure that science and
technology are steadily integrated inside the society, and their
beliefs are upgraded accordingly.

They are starting to have full consciousness of such a situation, and
they are trying to find the way to achieve the ultimate freedom where
sustainable civilisation development and planetary expansion can
happen.

### 4. The contact of Gliese 832 C

At this crucial moment, however, a great scientific discovery shocked
the whole world when a new planet was discovered, Gliese 832 C, home
to a highly developed civilisation which has built its own sustainable
energy supporting system (similar to a Dyson sphere), by harvesting
energy from the stars to provide its growth.

The planetary space agency EPSA has announced that this new planetary
system is 99.8% similar to the original Planet Earth. After this
shocking news, all the industrial and federations are competing in a
space race in order to have first contact with that planet.

### 5. Awaken spirit

Here I quote the Galactica survival law No. F42S , which was advised
by Mr. Wolfgang Freeman Dyson in 3025.

This law says: Every intelligent species has to learn how to
collaborate together with others as best they can, to achieve the
level which is called Ulysse Entropy, a point where the synergy could
bring this intelligent species to another level and rebuild the faith
system, that could bring the whole species to another level of
civilisation.

A secret meeting has been organised by several organisations and
enterprises, such as the Planetary Disaster and Monitoring centre,
Extraterrestrial Defence Agency, Future-us ( a planetary think tank
that acts as an idea generation machine to provide counsel and advice
for the different country governors), Planetary Lab (an institution
that gathers all the scientists and engineers to do research on the
next space frontier, including society study, anthropology,
astrobiology, astrophysicists…etc. The research centre is based on the
research network that CERN established in the 20th century, but the
equipment has been largely modified and updated). In the middle of
Himalaya mountains, after a long discussion with all the participants,
they made the decision to pursue a secret mission.

### 6. Gliese 832 C Expedition

A secret intergalactic expeditionary mission comprised by a group of
scientists, visionaries and engineers has been sent to Gliese 832 C,
in order to make contact with the intelligent species there and learn
from them a new way of organising human society and how to achieve
sustainable resources and energy consumption.

The Gliese 832 C Expedition was sent from Planet Earth in 2035 by the
Planetary Development Agency, a fusion of several pre-national space
agencies from different countries with a common objective.

This mission was intended to fly to the Gliese 832 C, a newly
discovered planet with an intelligent species with whom the PDA have
successfully communicated.  Gliese 832 is a planet where all activity
is based on a distributed intelligence system in which every
individual organises themselves and is fully conscious of what they
are doing.

This planet offers an opportunity for the expedition members to learn
how the populated society organises itself and collaborates to develop
their society, and to bring this knowledge back to Planet Earth to
help it find ways to sustain human society there.

I'm the civilisation intelligence convoy. I'm to accompany them for
this mission, in order to ensure there are no dangerous
happenings. This is my last mission, and I will return from their
planet to solve the key problems that keep human civilisation stuck in
this era.

My last mission includes encoding and backing up all the science and
technology developed and involved in that civilisation's history, and
transferring it to the next shell I will adapt in the future. I will
pass through a tunnel and do the quantum leap to another civilisation,
I will follow the Galactica map which is already embedded inside my
system.

### 7. The Mysterious Romantic journey

During the mission, I fell in love with the Co-Captain. He convinced
me to take hm with me to the Andromeda Galaxy. I agreed.

Our path towards Gliese 832 C was changed and redirected to the
direction of Andromeda.

During our journey passing the border of Milky Way Galaxy, something
happened on the ship. I'm disrupted by certain inexplicable events.

### 8. The virus

A discussion with my personal doctor tells me of shocking events:
during the era in which I stayed on Earth with the shell of human, I
was infected by several unknown human "viruses" which could cause the
core dysfunction, threatening the loss of our own civilisation data.

Diagnostic results:

Since Human is an intelligent creature which is highly developed, this
effect could transfer through biochemical contacts. That because part
of my system is not fully functioning, some syndrome including the
growing emotional capacity, which human called " love".

### 9. Disclosed hitchhiker

A few days later, during the transition in the wormhole while I'm
uploading all the data, I discover that the co-captain has a
suspicious background, suggesting that he is a representative of an
ancient religious group that has been sent to destroy this ship and
change its mission, a person who is technologically enhanced and able
to transfer their own consciousness and mind to the intended target.

Underneath his gorgeous human shell, this shocking fact requires me to
make a decision.

When I dig further into the situation, it becomes worse, I find the
 other seven pilots have also been infected by him, most of them are
 in a critical state. I need to make a decision…

### 10. Decision making

But time is too late, I have to leave, the quantum leap consumes a lot
of energy.  The only way is to destroy the infected co-captains, but
without these captains, the ship won't able to go its final
destination. The only solution is to freeze the whole ship and all the
crew, and then go back to the ship one day and bring them back. I
decide to sacrifice my heart and part of the organ which has been
infected by the virus.  I kill the Co-Captain and keep the hundreds of
crew on board… frozen, and don't know when there will be a chance to
awaken them again.

I am ready to do the quantum leap, and the ship is frozen in the
wormhole…

### 11. The speech

Here I am, I successfully leapt to Andromeda! I'm alive.  Now, I have
to report the event and I will apply to go back to that wormhole to
release my ship's crew and continue this journey.

I want your full support and the right to command a 1000 ship convoy
in order to pass through that Drake Passage and bring them back.

...

<p class="author bio"><a href="../authors/yu-li">Yu Li</a> is 31 years old. She lives and works between Geneva and Shenzhen. Yu is a researcher, interaction and speculative designer.</p>
