---
title: Free Software Economics
author: hellekin
section: ARCHITECTONICS OF POWER
layout: book
previous: <a href="from-outer-space">From Outer Space</a>
up: <a href="./">ARCHITECTONICS OF POWER</a>
next: <a href="beyond-capitalism">Beyond Capitalism</a>
---

Fifteen years ago, in his seminal article [Code Is Law][0], Lawrence
Lessig identified a problematic: _"The most important contexts of
regulation in the future will affect Internet commerce: where the
architecture does not enable secure transactions."_ Today, European
free software researchers are implementing innovative solutions to
address this and other issues that will shape digital economics in the
near future.

We argue that beyond regulation, code embeds politics. We'll introduce
two projects we think will transform not only how we conduct economic
transactions online, but which also hold the potential to radically
change the global balance of economic power.

_Freecoin_ is a social digital currency based on the blockchain
technology of Bitcoin but which relies on a "social proof of work"
instead of the original brute-force algorithmic proof of work used in
Bitcoin. Freecoin was developed by the Dyne Foundation, a free culture
foundry based in the Netherlands, and now a European Research
Network. Freecoin is Project no. 610349 in the FP7 - CAPS framework,
under the Decentralised Citizens ENgagement Technologies (D-CENT)
project.

_GNU Taler_ is the Taxable Anonymous Libre Economic Reserve, a new
electronic payment system under development at Inria, the French
National Institute for Information and Automation Research, and the
Technical University of Munich (TUM). It aims at delivering an online
and offline payment solution for various established currencies such
as Euro, U.S. Dollar, or even electronic currencies such as Freecoin.

Together they implement a unique electronic solution for mainstream
economics beyond payment. They were specifically designed with social
values addressing the shortcomings of both early electronic currencies
such as Bitcoin, enabling a variety of local currencies to work
together, extending transactions to non-monetary domains such as
distributed storage, and drastically limiting the criminal use of
money. Their combined approaches unfold a many-to-many platform
suitable for daily use from global micro-payments to local social
currencies.

Bitcoin was the first digital currency to appear on the Internet. It
implements a distributed and authenticated public ledger called the
blockchain, whose mode of operation is based on decentralized
consensus. The blockchain replaces the bank: it uses cryptographic
techniques to regulate the emission of coins and verify transactions
between peers.

The design of Bitcoin has definitive shortcomings: first of all it's
very volatile. By the time this article was finished, its value was
down to USD 402.7 after reaching USD 479 earlier during the day. As
all finalized Bitcoin transactions appear in the blockchain, the whole
market is transparent, and a coin's history can be used to connect
identities to addresses. To avoid double spending, no bitcoin
transaction can be reversed, which means the buyer is not protected
against fraud from the seller, nor addressing errors. By design,
Bitcoin rewards early adopters. Finally, the proof of work requires a
significant amount of computing power which translates into high
energy costs.

## Freecoin

[Freecoin][1] is a set of tools that let people run a reward scheme
that is transparent and auditable by other organizations. Designed for
participatory and democratic organizations willing to incentivize
participation it is, unlike centralized banking databases, a social
currency that is reliable, simple, and resilient. Technical and design
elements shape a way to legitimize the bottom-up process using audit
of cryptographic blockchain technologies such as decentralized
storage, ubiquitous wallets, and ad-hoc social remuneration systems.

The Freecoin project insists on the need to strengthen the democratic
debate necessary to consolidate and preserve the management of
economic transactions, especially those with a social orientation,
inside the local monetary circuit. It focuses on complementary
currency design to allocate and distribute credit created among
engaged members, using a reputation as risk management system.

Citizens can collectively define their social needs using a
participatory deliberation based on “social sustainability”: without
participation, local monetary circuits run the risk to remain too
little, too dependent on the local political cycles, too far from the
real demand that may be expressed by the local economic
system. Choices need to be informed with social objectives and ethical
criteria to properly allocate resources and investments.

The Freecoin / D-CENT project is an experiment in digital social
currency design that aims at solving two problems: (1) the
vulnerability of centralized information systems, whose integrity can
be jeopardized by compromising a few points of failure, and (2) the
management of digitally distributed trust to make sure that different
organizations which may not share trust can agree and verify the
integrity of a transaction history, even in the absence of the other
organization.

1 ) _Complementary currency governance systems_: with a minimalistic
reinterpretation of the blockchain technology, the Freecoin Toolchain
is a toolkit for community members to easily access and decide on the
features of their currency system by using a decentralized governance
structure - essentially, bringing back human intervention to oppose
the high-frequency trading algorithms (Durbin, 2010). A system for
collective deliberation on the decisions regarding digital currency
will allow users to engage in collective monetary policy-making.

2 ) _Distributed trust management systems_: reputation is the basis
for trust and decision-making. Putting together trust and the
blockchain, the Freecoin Toolchain allows for the design and
prototyping of systems aimed at managing social currency in a
community, i.e. reputation in a decentralized fashion. The use of
micro-endorsements allows the even spreading of risk among
participants, and the rewarding of the best political contributions
(similar to the participatory budgeting in Iceland). In a
municipality, the use of those credits as loyalty scheme vouchers
lowers the risk to promote proposals that go against the common
interest of the citizenry.

The issuance of new coins is a technology-driven mechanism based on a
consensus algorithm that neutralizes counterfeiting. However, this may
also be seen as a departure from an active and critical engagement
among humans and machines, whereby the creation of money in the system
is motivated by social interactions for the common good, rather than
by exclusively hashing cycles and shortsighted
money-making. Therefore, the task of the Freecoin / D-CENT research is
to redefine Bitcoin’s ‘proof of work’ and the reward of a blockchain
system, to devolve power into the hands of people through a democratic
decision process. The outcome of this shift in design is twofold: (1)
people engage in transactions that have real world desirable impact
that they produce and collectively construct; (2) new participants can
enjoy an egalitarian economic environment by avoiding the undesirable
condition of structural advantage by early adopters of a currency. At
the same time, this allows complete democratic oversight of
transaction history and collective deliberation on social currency
system rules of engagement and reward.

The Freecoin project is licensed as Affero GNU General Public License
version 3 or later to make sure that all uses, commercial or
non-commercial, will provide access to the source code, be it modified
or not.

## GNU Taler

At IETF 93, Edward Snowden said via videoconference: _"I think one of
the big things that we need to do, is we need to get away from
true-name payments on the Internet. The credit card payment system is
one of the worst things that happened for the user, in terms of being
able to divorce their access from their identity."_ So while obviously
some people do not care much about their privacy, we do think that
many will heed his words once a viable alternative exists. Identity
theft, fraud, convenience and efficiency gains are other reasons why
consumers or merchants are likely to be excited about adopting Taler.

While our initial market is likely to be technological enthusiasts
with a focus on privacy, we believe that the technology is applicable
in general for all payments (in online stores and physical stores)
assuming sufficient engineering effort (integration, ease of use,
etc.) is put behind it.

However, as the receivers of funds are not anonymous and can be
audited and taxed by the state, Taler's market does not include tax
evasion, money laundering, human trafficking and any other forms of
illegal trade that have ballooned the popularity of Bitcoin.

Established payment systems, such as the ubiquitous credit cards, try
to authenticate the user making the payment.  In contrast, Taler uses
cryptography to secure the value and validity of the payment. As a
result, identity theft is no longer a problem for customers using
Taler, and merchants also do not have to worry about the theft of
sensitive customer information. Naturally, customers may reveal their
identity (i.e. for shipping), but they are not forced to by the
payment system. In contrast to previous research designs, Taler
provides stronger assurances for the customer's privacy (including
better than BitCoin, where transactions are linkable). We are also the
first electronic payment system of this type that supports giving
change (i.e. pay 5 EUR with a 100 EUR coin and get 95 EUR in
electronic change) with these privacy assurances. Taler can even
provide refunds to customers without violating their anonymity. At the
same time, transaction costs are several orders of magnitude cheaper
than those with BitCoin-technologies. At scale, we expect transaction
costs to be lower than those for existing credit cards, as expenses
from fraud by consumers, merchants or identity theft are prevented by
the cryptographic protocol.

Unlike BitCoin, Taler does not introduce a new currency but merely
provides digital representations of existing currencies (such as EUR,
USD or even BTC), eliminating the risk from currency fluctuations
introduced by payment systems that introduce a new currency, such as
BitCoin, AltCoins, or Stellar.

Our system consists of various components operated by different
groups. The mint creating the digital coins is mostly finished and
just undergoing additional testing and audits. The mint is also the
most complex part of the design. Even after this is finished, we still
need to integrate the mint with the banking system of each respective
country to perform wire transfers. This is a one-time expense per
banking system. For the customers, we need to ensure that the "wallet"
application works well for their respective platform. Our initial
implementation is for Firefox, ports to other browsers and native apps
for mobile phones will require more work. The wallet is simpler than
the mint, but still non-trivial especially if we want to make it easy
to use and nice to look at.

Finally, each merchant will require some modifications to their
business logic to integrate the new payment system. While these
modifications are way smaller and easier than the mint or the wallet,
there are of course many more businesses platforms than browsers or
banking systems. Hence, while the work for an individual store should
be tiny, this will be a major effort. We are trying to document our
protocol and prototypes and will provide reference implementations in
various languages to facilitate this integration.

GNU Taler is free software released under the terms of the GNU General
Public License version 3 or later.

<p class="author bio">by hellekin, with jaromil and Radium, of <a
href="https://dyne.org">Dyne.org</a> / <a
href="http://dcentproject.eu/">D-CENT</a> project, and Christian
Grothoff</a>, INRIA Rennes, maintainer of <a href="https://taler.net">GNU Taler</a>.</p>

[0]: http://harvardmagazine.com/2000/01/code-is-law-html
[1]: http://freecoin.ch/
[2]: https://taler.net/
