---
title: The Cost of Internet Freedom
author: Geert Lovink
section: ARCHITECTONICS OF POWER
layout: book
previous: <a href="time-to-wake-up">Time to Wake Up</a>
up: <a href="./">ARCHITECTONICS OF POWER</a>
next: <a href="why-i-choose-privacy">Why I choose Privacy</a>
---


_Dedicated to Bassel Khartabil, written for the Cost of Freedom Book Sprint._

> Every act of rebellion expresses a nostalgia for innocence and an
  appeal to the essence of being.” -- Albert Camus

Let’s translate Isaiah Berlin’s "Two Concepts of Liberty" from 1958 to
our age. Berlin distinguishes between negative and positive freedom:
there is the negative goal of warding off interference, and the
positive sense of the individual being his or her own master. In both
cases, a fundamental distinction is made between the autonomy of the
subject and the crushing reality of repressive systems. For Berlin,
freedom is situated outside of the system. Written in the shadow of
totalitarianism, at the height of the Cold War, there wasn’t much else
for him to expect. In that period, the notion of freedom as an
everyday experience was absent. The existentialist gestures after
World War II emphasized the legal rights of the individual-as-rebel
who stood up against evil outside forces.

Right at the beginning of his famous essay, Berlin formulates Evgeny
Morozov-type sentences that sound remarkably familiar to those
involved in contemporary ‘net criticism’ debates.

“Where ends are agreed, the only questions left are those of means,
and these are not political but technical, that is to say, capable of
being settled by experts or machines, like arguments between engineers
or doctors.” And he continues: “That is why those who put their faith
in some immense transforming phenomenon must believe that all
political and moral problems can be turned into technological ones.”

Berlin reminds us of the phrase of Friedrich Engels about “replacing
the government of persons by the administration of things.” Sounds
very timely, no? But wait, is this an old communist phrase, or a
libertarian dogma preached by Silicon Valley billionaires?

Fast forward ten or twenty years and the concept of ‘the system’ is no
longer perceived as alien. In the 1970s, the idea spread that
(computer) systems were man-made and could be programmed, designed,
and thus democratized. The critique of the technocratic society that
we can trace in the memories of Albert Speer, published in 1969, were
soon to be forgotten and taken over by a fascination for the
do-it-yourself spirit of the garage hackers. Instead of looking at IBM
mainframe computers as a tool of 1984's Big Brother, the personal
computer was introduced as a portable counter-cultural alternative,
intended to undermine power as such and break it up into a 1001
fragments of decentralized, distributed expressions of human
creativity.

Jump another thirty years onwards, and Internet freedom activists run
up against very clear boundaries and setbacks. Liberal obsessions with
privacy and copyright are still interesting but no longer essential in
order to understand the big picture. What’s at stake is much larger
than a bunch of legal issues, defined by lawyers. What’s necessary is
a comprehensive understanding of the political economy of the Net,
combined with critical knowledge of global politics. The legal
strategies have run empty. It is now all about power politics and
organization of the field. The loose ties that social media have left
us with do not foster long-term collaborations but force us into a
24/7 cult of the update.

The philosophical question, can we find freedom inside the machine,
should be answered with a definite no. So far, programmers, geeks and
artists have stressed the possibilities of carving out small pockets
for themselves, in order to realize their free software and creative
commons projects. This ‘temporary autonomous zones’ approach has a
liberal consensus as its premise, that the ‘Internet’ will tolerate
such experiments within its infrastructure.

The original Internet freedom within the system is shrinking as we
speak, and we lack the appropriate tools and strategies to do
something to counter it. Soon we will be back at square one, demanding
freedom of the Internet.

The ideal of freedom outside of the Matrix will not necessarily be
Luddite in nature. The coming uprising against the Internet as a tool
of surveillance and repression will be technologically informed, and
needs to be distinguished from the related human right to have time
off work and have a life. This ain’t no offline romanticism. Our memes
need to communicate this simple message: positive Internet freedom is
the road to serfdom. We need to revolt against the soulless,
mechanical ideas of the Silicon Valley engineering class and their
solutionist marketing slogans. In order to prepare ourselves, we need
an understanding of the Two Concepts of Internet Liberty.

<p class="author bio">Geert Lovink is a Dutch-Australian media
theorist and critic. He is the founding director of the Institute of
Network Cultures, Amsterdam.</p>
